Camden Resident Index
Summary
The Camden Resident Index is a data management system utilising software supplied by IBM that allows for a ‘single view of a citizen’ by aggregating data from 16 different council business systems across Camden Council, covering 123 fields of primarily demographic information. It is to date the largest data management installation in local government in the UK. It was created in 2013 following the closure of the national children’s database Contact Point to uphold multi-agency work. It uses probabilistic matching technology to match individuals or households across the different business systems, in which records are matched together to produce a comparison score that indicates the likelihood of records belonging to the same person or family. The Camden Resident Index is used by the Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub to locate information about a household’s engagement with services across the Council. A key use of the index is to enable fraud detection, such as validation for residency for accessing council services such as school places, number of residents in a household for council tax discount, or cases of illegal subletting of council housing. 

Implementation
Camden Council is one of the first local authorities to have implemented a master data management system, ‘to allow the single view of a citizen.’ (business analyst) The rationale for implementation came from both a view ‘to improve customer service’ and ‘the frustration of residents’ (business analyst) with different parts of the council not being aware of previous engagement. It was also reasoned as a business case for improving fraud detection.  It followed on from previous attempts at integrated data sets in Children’s Services which were closed following a change in government: ‘Contact Point was a national children’s data base which was set up but soon after it was launched, there was a change in Government and it was scrapped but I think people had got a taste for how multiagency working, different agencies could get a single view of a child.’ (project manager)
The decision to contract IBM as supplier followed a proof of concept stage: ‘we ran...eight datasets in a snapshot dataset, we looked at the end result, we then identified potential savings, particularly through fraud, from that and the business case was made and we carried out a standard procurement. Two or three companies bid and IBM won.’ (former employee) Whilst the software, which is similar to anti-fraud technology used in the banking sector (former employee), is supplied by IBM, the data model is accessible to the Council and the data that informs the matching process and how it is weighted can be adjusted: ‘we have control over the matching algorithm and over the last year we have regularly reviewed the algorithm. We are getting good results in terms of matching residents.’ (business analyst) 
Model
The Camden Resident Index uses probabilistic matching technology ‘which is machine learning decision making on 16 of the Council’s biggest databases.’ (former employee). According to an FOI request processed in November 2017, data sources used for the Camden Resident Index include: 
    • Customer transactions
    • Housing
    • Council Tax and Benefits
    • Electoral Register
    • Adult and Children’s Social Services
    • Schools and pupil information
    • Parking Control & permits, accessible transport
    • Young people’s information
    • Libraries
Using the IBM software, records from different departments are matched to determine how likely it is that two records are the same person: ‘two records are compared and they get a comparison score and the closer they are, the higher the score. And if things diverge, like they’ve got different dates of birth, the score will go down.’ (project manager) This then allows for some data discrepancies between different systems. In order to overcome discrepancies, it is possible to create a ‘Camden most trusted view’ (project manager) which is based on attributing different levels of verification to different datasets: ‘Data is verified differently in different business areas. For example, when signing up for a council tenancy, residents need to provide a passport, whereas a library service wouldn’t require such stringent verification. How we form our trusted view of data is based on this detailed knowledge of business processes and we are able to configure on an ongoing basis.’ (project manager)
The index can also provide a household view which is pivoted around the address which joins data together to show the different record from the different people associated with that address. 

Further details about the Camden Resident Index and the workings of the model for flagging individuals and/or households as potential fraudsters were withheld in response to an FOI request on grounds of exemption. 
Deployment and Uses

The Camden Resident Index is used by a number of teams within Social Care, Housing, Accessible Transport, Electoral Services, Customer Services, Internal Audit, Planning. According to Camden Council’s privacy statement, approximately 350 staff across the council have access to the Camden Resident Index. It further notes, that ‘Their access is tailored on a need to know basis and the majority of the system users will only access the Adults’ records. Access to children’s records is restricted to children’s services staff (the complex families teams, children missing education, safeguarding, admissions fraud etc.), system administrators and audit teams.’ 
One of the key use cases for the Camden Resident Index is fraud detection. This is particularly enabled from the household composition, for example to detect illegal subletting or benefits claims, or school admissions. Fraud detection can include ‘school admissions where people are applying for school places from places they don’t live in, or people illegally subletting their council tax properties, or people retaining accessible transport benefits when they no longer live in the borough or parking permits; the council services to which they’re not legitimately entitled. This would give us indicators as to people who may fall into that category because the patterns don’t match the resident, they don’t appear to be resident or they appear to have moved.’ (project manager) 
Importantly, it was noted in interviews that such fraud detection would not automatically lead to a final decision. Instead ‘it helps the service whittle down the likely cases to investigate…you’d always want to rely on the human judgement based on the information.’ (project manager) 
Another related use of the Camden Resident Index mentioned in interviews is eligibility for services. Not in terms of evaluating someone’s eligibility, but in order to eliminate the need to re-apply for services: ‘so if you’re thinking about Freedom Passes or disability badges, parking blue badges, that sort of thing, then in Camden what we did, using the data we had available from the 16 systems, is switch the whole thing around and say you no longer need to apply for these things because we know you’re registered with adult social care, you’re receiving a service as a disabled person and nothing has changed.’ (former employee)
Beyond fraud and eligibility, the Camden Resident Index is used by teams such as the Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub that get referrals about missing children or children at risk or vulnerable adults as a way to get information from different systems immediately: ‘In the past they had to go into each individual system separately to find out information but now on the Camden Resident Index, they can go in and find out the information about that particular child and they can find out about the services that that child is being engaged with or is known to, and then they can also find out information about the household and their engagement with our services.’ (project manager) According to an overview of the system provided by the charity Involve, this deployment of the Camden Resident Index has ‘enabled frontline professionals, such as multidisciplinary social workers, to do their jobs in ways that wouldn’t previously have been possible, such as flagging safeguarding issues which otherwise wouldn’t have been seen by legacy systems.’
Predominantly the Camden Resident Index is used for providing a view of individuals or households, but it was also mentioned in interviews that some neighbourhood and population level insights are drawn from the index, also for the purposes of predictive analytics. For example, it was noted in an interview that birth rates documented in different areas of the borough informed decisions about targeting children’s centre services according to local need – which centres to retain and which to potentially decommission (former employee). More generally, future plans for the creation of a ‘data lake’ was mentioned in interviews, in which structured data would be combined with unstructured data, to include transactional data that can help spot patterns and inform decisions about what services are needed. 
Interviewees at Camden expressed hesitancy about profiling at individual level and there is no ‘scoring’ practice taking place that is aimed at predicting future behaviour. However, in one interview it was noted that the Children’s Services and the Troubled Families Programme have sought to create data visualisation tools that draw on the Camden Resident Index, such as the Family Support Dashboard, which includes ‘family customer journey mapping to show which services over time a particular family has touched and what is the likely pathway for those families based on similar families in the past.’ (former employee) In subsequent correspondence, this was clarified as being a matter of using ‘linkages created in the Camden Resident Index matching engine to meet the requirements of the national Troubled Families programme. This involves the linkage of data from different council databases to identify complex need and monitor the progress of having received a service’ (business analyst) and was noted as being markedly different to profiling.  
Auditing and Safeguards
Primary evaluation of the creation of the Camden Resident Index concerned the business case. In an overview of the system carried out by the charity Involve, it was noted that Camden estimates that it has saved £800k just from identification of illegal subletting of council housing. In an FOI request it was noted that the budget for maintaining the Camden Resident Index is £50,000 per annum in addition to ongoing staff costs for support and development which is approximately another £50,000. 
Some consultation was also carried out when the system was first introduced with a ‘stakeholder panel to give input’ run by customer services with a team that included members of the public, ‘to help shape it.’ (former employee) Further consultation has not been carried out beyond the information that is available about the system in the council’s privacy statement. It was noted in interviews in relation to the impact of the EU General Data Protection and Regulation Act (GDPR) that ‘most of the information data that we collect in the council, we collect because of statutory duty to care or to provide services and not based on consent.’ (business analyst)
Performance tuning of the matching algorithm comes from working ‘closely with the Resilient Families programme [previously the Troubled Families programme].’ It was explained, ‘when we make changes to the algorithm they will check for duplicates and for false positives.’ (project manager) but it was not explained as a systematic auditing review. There is a regular audit of uses of the system that produces logs of activity including ‘how often people are searching, so if there’s unusual activity, if people seem to be trawling the system, we could flag it.’ (project manager) 
Challenges
A key challenge with the Camden Resident Index noted in interviews is the data quality of the different business systems, either because of lack of information, or wrong date of birth, or because the format of entering information is different between different systems: ‘This does shine the light on our system’s data quality….Data quality is always an ongoing challenge and the best thing to do is address it at source where there’s a backlog of data.’ (project manager) This also means training people to input data differently or to enforce better quality data:
it’s educating people in the business about data collection and how bad data, especially if we’re moving towards sharing data and moving towards a data lake, how bad data somewhere can start bounding around if it’s not addressed and lead to more problems. So it might not matter too much to a particular service if they’ve got the address slightly wrong but then think about the wider implications of that. (project manager) 
Another challenge mentioned in interviews was the initial hesitancy about sharing data across services, either for legal protection reasons or ‘just cultural…and being concerned it would be used in a different way or in a way that is not intended for.’ (business analyst) However, it was noted that this challenge is less prominent now than it was when the system was first implemented. In one interview, the point was made that the reluctance to share information is no longer appropriate: 
my personal view is that this issue, and particularly about vulnerable people dying in some cases because information isn’t being shared, in some places has been going on far too long and the risk aversion around the sharing is not proportionate, and that actually it’s been proven in case after case that it is ethical and proportionate and legal that a risk-based approach needs to be taken, not a sort of yes/no legalistic approach. (former employee) 
In terms of the workings of the algorithm and its ability to match records, it was noted that it can go wrong in two ways: ‘You can either not match people together who are the same person or you can start matching people incorrectly who are different people, and if you swing the algorithm too far one way, you get one problem and too far the other way, you get the other problem and it’s what the risk is, what’s the greater risk. If you join people incorrectly together, is that more of a risk than records being skewed all over the place?’ (project manager) 
