Kent Integrated Dataset

Summary
The Kent Integrated Dataset is used for population health planning. It is not used to make decisions about specific individuals. Data about individuals in the dataset are pseudonymised. Access to the dataset is limited to the Kent Public Health Observatory team. Controlled access is possible for research purposes but requires application. In the spring of 2018 Kent County Council noted that they have not deployed predictive analytics processes but that they have hopes to in the future. They have done analyses that ‘project into the future based on past trends’. They are developing a system dynamics model, detailed below, to see the impact of health prevention efforts on reducing smoking, obesity and others.The Kent Clinical Commissioning Groups have contracted Optum, a healthcare intelligence company, to provide their business analytics service. Optum is going to create a new Kent Integrated Dataset to inform commissioning decisions. Optum is part of the American UnitedHealth Group. More research into the development of this new Optum integrated dataset is ongoing. We requested an interview with Optum to find out more details about the new dataset, but an Optum representative declined. 
The details provided in this summary concern only the first Kent Integrated Dataset developed and controlled by Kent County Council and not details about the new Optum system. 
Implementation
The Kent Integrated Dataset has been described as following the model of Welsh and Scottish whole population electronic healthcare records, but goes further by including data ‘from a wider range of health and care services’. It also provides data from the entirety of a local population. The dataset comprises the data of almost two million residents living in South East England. The goal is to enable Kent and Medway planners to know more about how people are using their services, the services needed and also how this connects to wider socioeconomic and environmental contexts influencing health and service use. The dataset includes data from 2014 to the present and is continually updated.

As indicated in the table above, there were pre-existing pieces of legislation that enabled Public Health to access data but that also protected citizen data. The 2007 Local Government and Public Involvement Act and specifically the requirement that local authorities produce Joint Strategic Needs Assessments of the health and well-being of their communities was a key stimulator for the Kent Integrated Dataset. Previously those in Public Health could access data about single conditions, but there was recognition that being able to link up more datasets would provide a better picture of community health needs and service impact. 
Several contextual factors are important: a) increasing research evidence about the complex relationships between social and environmental contexts and health needs, b) local authorities facing cuts to funding that has influenced their ability to provide social care services and increased the needs of their citizens, c) and a national NHS funding gap influencing health care. 
The rationale for developing an integrated dataset was detailed in 2013. It has been argued that those commissioning services need to focus more on prevention and to do so by commissioning more integrated services and making better use of intelligence systems’:
‘Commissioners need the relevant resources and technical expertise to develop a longitudinal system using metrics that are person centered / population based, rather than the activity or performance of individual organisations or services. Improving the health and wellbeing of the population requires commissioners to have a cross sectional understanding of how prevention and preventative services impact differently at different population risk groups….
‘This paper makes a case for whole systems intelligence and a need to have a cultural shift from analysing data at an organisational level to analysing information across the complete patient pathway. This should include health and social care as well as information on socio, economic and environmental factors that contribute to health and wellbeing. In this regard it is about the effective sharing and management of information at a citizen level, scaled up to a population level to effectively understand the holistic nature of integrated care and the many confounding factors that affect health and social care outcomes and a person’s resilience to improved wellbeing.’ 
By linking up the datasets, the benefit has been the ability to better understand the public health needs of the people in Kent and Medway, service use and the impact of services. Before the Kent Integrated Dataset, healthcare and social care could only be looked at in isolation and people could only look at data relating to single conditions.

In a presentation the Kent Integrated Dataset is described as having its use restricted to four purposes:
    1) To assess return on investment by providing feedback on commissioning decisions, to determine the impact of different services, and to determine the impact of non-NHS, public sector, services on health and well-being (such as housing, education, police)
    2) To provide evidence that can be used for service design 
    3) To assist with the design of payment models and support new models of care
    4) For public health intelligence by supporting analytics that can enable effective prevention targeting and population budgeting

The strengths of the Kent Integrated Dataset are said to be:
    • That it covers areas other electronic health records don’t such as community health, mental health and social care
    • That it includes new variables, specifically the cost of an episode to enable economic modelling
    • That the dataset is updated regularly so it enables quick evaluation of service changes
    • That the use of a unique reference number for each user means patients can be tracked across services so researchers can get a better picture of the paths they take

There are a wide range of presentation videos and power point slides as well as publications available online detailing what the integrated dataset involves, the rationale for its use and some examples of how it has been used. Some examples of particular uses have been detailed below. 
There is little information available about the new Optum integrated dataset. Also unclear is how the governance of the new dataset may differ from the one in existence now. Research into this is ongoing. 
Model
The Kent Integrated Dataset is an attempt to ‘provide a single dataset across all Kent public services and put together by the Kent & Medway Clinical Commissioning Groups and Kent County Council Public Health. The dataset brings ‘together data from 250 local health and social care provider organisations” as well as Fire and Rescue Service data to support planning and commissioning decisions. It is referred to as an early linked dataset initiative and ‘possibly the largest linked dataset of its kind’.

Datasets not included (as of Jan. 2018) are: sexual health data, suicides, children’s social care data, hospital care not funded through NHS and the interactions of residents with care providers outside of Kent and Medway. It was agreed in principle that data from Specialist Children’s Services and education data would flow into the KID. Kent Police have agreed in principle that they are ready to share their data.
The system works through pseudonymisation. An encrypted version of people’s unique NHS identifier number is used to link the records of individuals across the different datasets including general practices, hospitals, community health services and social care. Pseudonymization happens at the source of where the data is generated. ‘Names are excluded and other potentially identifiable information is coarsened to prevent re-identification of individuals. For example, dates of birth are replaced by single-year-of-age and postcodes are replaced by Lower Super Output Areas (a geo-graphical area covering approximately 1500 residents).’
The system was developed in-house with start-up funds from the NHS ‘National Long Term Conditions Year of Care’ programme. When that funding ended Kent County Council and the local National Health Service agreed to continue funding and development.
‘The KID comprises individual-level linked EHRs from the following services located in Kent and Medway: primary care providers (including general practices, out-of-hours providers and walk-in centres), community health providers, mental health services, acute hospitals (including accident and emergency, inpatient and outpatient episodes), public health services, adult social care, fire & rescue service and palliative care hospices. The dataset includes records of interactions between residents of Kent and Medway and these services. Each service provider/data owner has securely uploaded data monthly since April 2014.’ Both Acorn and Experian socio-economic profiling tools are used as part of the KID. The Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells NHS Trust hold the contracts for extracting GP data and linking the KID to the CACI ACORN and Experian Mosaic population segmentation systems.
The kinds of data included vary by type of service used and event. Kent says that a full set of the variables used is available on request.
Deployment and uses
The main user of the Kent Integrated Dataset is Public Health. Analysis is done for the Director of Public Health and to also help the CCG’s develop the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment. An example provided was that the KID helps those in public health assess and respond to complex issues like multimorbidity. One of the main impacts noted was a shift toward greater focus on prevention and the value of preventive action.
[W]e are a public health team doing population health analysis, we don’t need to access patient identifiable data because that’s not our interest. Our interest is population level or population health analytics and most of our work is done on that basis (manager).
The dataset has been used in different ways to better target information to people, better understand services and how they may need to be improved. Work identifying the frail and elderly has led to the development of local care models that emphasize care for this group and the development of services to target this group.
Another example is work done with Public Health England in relation to health check equity audits. The programme looks at people between 40-74 who have a cardiovascular risk that has not been identified yet in order to prevent harm down the road. Through analysis they identified that certain segments of the population were less likely to go for a check-up and this information is being used to change the way the health checks programme is delivered to reach those groups.
The Public Health Observatory have undertaken an evaluation of Kent Fire and Rescue Service’s Safe and Well visits using the KID data. The evaluation seeks to identify if the visits have a positive impact on health outcomes, for example by reducing the incidents of hospital visits compared with a matched cohort. The initial evaluation has not identified a significant impact on health outcomes although it established the methodology in order that the affect can be analysed over the next three years. 
Kent Fire and Rescue Service is also talking with the Public Health Observatory about how they can use analysis to identify risk factors, like poor health, that make some groups more at risk of fire. The goal is to use this to target preventation such as Safe and Well visits.
The JSNA population cohort model ‘seeks to transform the Kent JSNA into a forward planning commissioning tool’. 

The tool uses “systems dynamics” to ‘model possible impacts of key policy and service capacity changes’. It’s said that the model can be used to ‘test “what if” scenarios focusing on additional investment on prevention’:
The model seeks to integrate and synthesise best estimates from a variety of sources to estimate the extent to which a range of factors, acting in combination, explain or predict certain health outcomes. Key model outputs include projected incidence, prevalence of long term conditions as well as population cohorts relevant for the Kent & Medway STP, including, for example, those affected by adverse childhood experience (ACE) as it is modelled into later life.
Auditing and safeguards
Only the public health observatory team within Kent County Council has regular access the integrated dataset and access is restricted to a controlled location. This has been connected to addressing people’s concern about meeting the Data Protection Act and obligations around confidentiality.
Kent County Council has allowed 6 analysts from NHS England to access the KID via contractual agreement. Access has also been provided to Carnall Farrar (private consultancy) and Whole Systems Partnership.
It is possible for researchers to get access to the KID by application for research as long as ‘the research is likely to provide some benefit to the Kent and Medway health and care economy’. It is said that to date the data has been used mostly for healthcare planning and not for research purposes. It has been noted that a number of universities want to work with the KID. 
An NHS Data Sharing Audit was done in May 2017 at Kent County Council Public Health Intelligence. The audit measured how uses of data conforms to the data sharing framework contract and the data sharing agreement in relation to the Office of National Statistics birth and death data. The audit also involved investigating if practices conform to Kent’s own policies and procedures. The audit team reported that ‘there is low risk of a breach of information security, duties of care, confidentiality or integrity’.
Two privacy impact assessments have been done. As part of the General Data Protection Regulation, a Data Protection Impact Assessment will need to be done on anything that is new or added to the KID. The Council has a GDPR working group to ensure compliance.
‘Data owners are responsible for validating and checking the quality of data before it is fed into the KID’... After each monthly upload to the KID, the data owners check that the correct total number of records is registered in the KID. The KID team then runs five checks on each ‘service function’ (primary care, social care, hospitals, etc.) to monitor data quality’.
‘Currently, individual-level data can only be viewed and analysed on Kent County Council’s computer systems, with access provided physically at Kent County Council or via a secure remote desktop’.
It is noted that the GDPR has specific requirements in terms of documentation including and related to data protection, impact assessment and IT data protection toolkit.
Confidentiality is maintained through pseudonymisation. Data is required to be anonymised before being published and its use is said to conform to the Information Commissioner Office’s anonymisation code. Data controlling organizations, such as a GP practice or community organization that provides data, are brought together as part of a board that governs the Kent Integrated Dataset. If people want to do a piece of analysis they bring it before the board and anyone on the board can stop an analysis they are not comfortable with.
The data warehouse audits the queries that are run and any overly specific search it is said should ring an alarm.
In terms of data quality, data quality issues are noted in report footnotes. Someone at the Observatory is responsible for producing a monthly data quality summary that indicates issues. The Observatory keeps a data quality matrix that flags every issue identified, split by provider type. Also users of the data feed back any data quality issues they find to ensure they are addressed.
KCC is now working through how governance arrangements of the KID may need to be changed to promote research and development needs. As part of this the General Data Protection Regulation is influencing decisions made:
‘The GDPR emphasises the importance of having a contractual arrangement to actually underpin any data sharing arrangement. So we have to be clear about the customer / supplier arrangement and control set. How does a customer instruct the supplier to actually process the data in the right way? Within those governance arrangements we would have ideally a research ethics committee which will be the robust process for managing any sort of research requests… So the plan in principle is to try and use existing forums, advisory public and patient engagement groups to be as part of the governance for the KID going forward’ (manager)
It has been stated that many local authorities are looking to copy the Kent model.
System details 
‘The KID was built from existing systems, using a SQL-server data warehouse (The Kent and Medway Health Informatics Services) and a purchased business intelligence tool. KMHIS developed a ‘black box algorithm’ for data as it enters the KID. This runs an algorithm to check that the information on either side matches up, without the system operators needing to see identifiable data. The programme then creates a de-personalised NHS number – a 64 bit sequence – which is given to each piece of personal data and is applied to all files that come in relating to the same person. The project was assigned an IG expert who advised on the requirements of KID and informed the data sharing agreement for each agency, including the 240 GP surgeries in Kent’
Kent County Council uses Microsoft SQL server Management Studio version 17 to access data held in the Kent Integrated Dataset. Data is extracted into three statistical software programmes for analysis: SPSS, STATA, Excel.
Patients can opt-out by letting their GP know they do not want their data to be shared and used, although in a 2017 committee meeting it was suggested that there may be changes to this process. As of January 2018 it was reported that 2.3% of patients had opted out from sharing their data. As of December 2017 it was reported that 93 percent of primary care providers were sharing their data.
Risk assessment tools deployed in the Kent Integrated Dataset include the King’s Fund model used to identify the risk of unplanned admittance to hospital. It is noted that this is ‘a well-established risk assessment tool in the NHS' It has also been noted that Kent County Council uses an electronic frailty index that has been detailed by the NHS. The Index uses health record data to identify and grade the severity of frailty. The goal is ‘to enable treatments and services to be targeted to a person based on their frailty status rather than their chronological age’.
Challenges 
Minutes of meetings from the Kent County Council Health Reform and Public Health Cabinet Committee show that members have raised concerns about the potential for the data to be vulnerable to cyberattack. The response has been that the Council continually mitigates against this and complies with Information Governance Standards and NHS Digital guidelines for data security.
Other committee members raise concerns about the potential to re-identify people, to this the response is that the County Council does not have ‘the scope to re-identify pseudonymised data collated by the NHS and would only ever have access to the pseudonymised version'
Data quality is an ongoing issue with quality varying across datasets. Also noted is that data are not always recorded consistently.
There is ongoing concern about how to engage and inform the public about data uses. Those who developed and use the KID are in the process of determining how to better consult with the public about uses of data in a way that engages and leads to greater understanding.
The GDPR is requiring those using personal data, even if it is pseudonymised, to be ‘more precise and strict in the design, implementation and enforcement’ of their code of practice’.







