Manchester’s Research & Intelligence Database

Summary
Manchester City Council is using a system it calls the Manchester Research & Intelligence Database to identify Troubled Families, families in need of support, to enable caseworkers to access more information more quickly than previously and to enable the collection and analysis of data to assess services and impact. The Council developed the system by buying an IBM product called iBase. The approach to using the system has been internally developed. It is noted that the aim is to empower ‘lead professionals to make the best use of data they are legally able to see, and is not about replacing decision making or interpretation with system algorithms or decisions’. The stated aim is to enable a more ‘holistic’ understanding of people, needs and services. Future goals include developing decision making tools, building performance reporting tools, building threshold and alerting tools and rolling the system out to more users, as well as connecting more data.
Implementation

Manchester’s use of data analytics was motivated, in part, by the need to identify families that met the criteria for the Troubled Families programme. In Manchester, the experience was that a data system that enabled the ability to understand complex and multiple factors as well as networks was required.
The data warehouse that Manchester created, as of 2016, integrated 16 datasets. Caseworkers are able to access this data going back five years. The aim was to employ a system that links individuals to families and households, to organisations like schools and that also reveals the links between families and that tracks interventions, service use and outcomes. Other goals were to ensure visualization as a means of assisting case workers, and to also employ a system that could be used to make decisions about service reform and to enable finding efficiencies and savings.
In public presentations it has been noted that consent is sought from those whose data is used in the system because it is viewed as good practice to tell people their data is being shared, but that there are also occasions when people’s data is shared without consent. The Privacy Impact Assessment is no longer available online so more details about how consent is sought and from whom is not available.

Model
The iBase system, IBM i2 iBase IntelliShare was purchased in 2012 as part of Manchester City Council’s Troubled Families initiative. It was determined that this was the best product to enable the data matching and visualisation needed to work on the Troubled Families programme. This was purchased as an ‘off-the-shelf’ product and there was no collaboration with IBM to produce the product. There is no development or data sharing agreement with IBM. 
The datasets used are detailed in the model above and updated on a regular basis. These are imported from internal and external systems and are split into the following categories: address data, health data, school data, offending data, financial data, work & skills data, and social care data:
The majority of the data-sets contain details of individual people and details of the event linked to those individuals, ie offences, school absences, etc. People from the different data sets are then created in the Research & Intelligence database using their first name, surname & date of birth as the unique identifier linking any events and addresses relating to this person…

The creation of a family entity is created once a family has been referred into a service and a lead professional has completed a whole family genogram, the lead professional then adds a family number to each individual from the family which links the individuals together in the system.
The iBase system is used to match data so caseworkers can view and access multiple sources of data at the same time easily. It is also used to identify connections and relationships between individuals and families.
Data used for analytics by researchers and analysts is extracted from the system and anonymized.
Predictive modelling is used to determine where help is needed, where it will succeed or not and where families can help themselves. In terms of the techniques being used, decision trees are used to try and find causality links and predict when a child in need status will be flagged in a system. Cluster analysis is used to identify distributions of needs or characteristics of families in order to understand how to shape a programme or assign support. Regression analysis is used to identify factors that are most important and predictors of future events. Spatial analysis is used to plan services and understand the relationship of spatial issues to other policies.
Deployment and Uses

One of the aims of the system is to give caseworkers better quality information. About 200 frontline users are said to have access to the intellishare product, the webportal that users use to access iBase in order to query the database about their cases. It is described as giving caseworkers, ‘in just a few clicks’ a comprehensive view of a family, including interactions with other agencies, as well as social and family networks. When a case is presented to a worker, the worker looks in the iBase system to understand the activities around the family and then uses this information to direct their follow-up questions and searches.
Another stated aim is to save keyworker time. As detailed in Nesta document:
We were unable to secure an interview with frontline workers to determine the accuracy of this estimate. More work generally is needed to better understand how frontline workers are engaging with this technology.
Performance management is another way that the system is used. 
‘[T]he software also makes it easier to monitor and check social workers’ cases for           managers, and provides a useful set of checks at the point at which a case is closed’.
It is also noted that performance data is combined with cost data to inform the ‘investment case’ for early intervention programmes.
For instance the system was used to inform an investment case for Multi-Systemic Therapy (MST) by accurately identifying likely cohort size. MST involves teams of four staff, and requires a minimum cohort size. Correctly identifying the likely demand for services prevents wasted expenditure.
The system provides evidence about the effectiveness of different interventions such as FIP (Family Intervention Programme) or Early Help, which can be used to decide on re- and de-commissioning of services or how to reshape service provision.
The data is also used for analytics. Data is extracted from the iBase system, anonymized, and then analysed by researchers and analysts through the use of statistical packages such as Excel, SPSS, R and MySQL.
Auditing and Safeguards
The approach to using the iBase system was developed internally. The Council notes that: ‘no personal data has been shared with agencies / collaborators for the purposes of system design or analytical reporting’.
The system has been subject to a Privacy Impact Assessment, although we were unable to access this online at the time of writing.
The system tracks use and staff are told that unauthorized use can lead to being fired. 
Manchester City Council said that it sought legal guidance when developing its approach to using its integrated data system.
Through the new system, key workers do not have to ask to share data, they are entitled to see data in line with the responsibilities and duties of their job. The decisions built into the system were based on meticulous work to decide the legality of sharing data in very specific, defined instances. This includes sharing school attendance information, or reports of police call-outs, where there is a safeguarding concern about the child. Advice from a barrister was sought on these specific instances, which then informed the development of a Privacy Impact Assesssment in collaboration with partner agencies. Manchester wanted to reduce individual decision-making about data sharing because different interpretations led to inconsistencies in which data was being shared.
It is noted that a small amount of data cleansing takes place before data is imported into the system to ensure that names and date of birth are in a consistent format. ‘This involves reviewing unique person IDs in the source systems to ensure that duplicates are removed and the names & DOBs matched are consistent’.
Challenges
It has been noted that half of the work in developing the system related to working out the informational governance issues. Negotiating technical issues were found to not be as difficult as expected, although poor data quality was mentioned as something that posed a particular challenge. Other related challenges included developing and agreeing on rules and processes as well as the ‘data architecture’.
A lack of engagement and the fact that the system was not viewed as a priority by all stakeholders has been referenced as a challenge.
The documents referenced do not often identify the risks involved. Those using the system would be able to best identify these.

